# attendance-project

J. Savage Project 1

In this project I chose to look at various data sets centered around student attendance data. I wanted to know if different demographics affected student attendance. I used the following data sets:
        - District attendance rates broken down by demographic group
        - District address and location information by zip code
Through reducing and mergind data frames, running for loops, and using various components of matplotlib, I was able to create different graphs and maps to answer all of my questions from my proposal and more. Here is my analysis:

1.) Is there a correlation between the percentage of students receiving free or reduced lunch in a district with the overall district attendance rate?
Approximately 30% of students in the state of Connecticut qualify for Free/Reduced Meals. The Pearson r value when comparing the percentage of free and reduced meals students to overall district attendance rate is -0.64. This signifies a moderate negative correlation between the percent of the population that receives free and reduced meals and the overall school attendance. The higher percentage of students who qualify for free and reduced meals, the lower attendance rate. From the line graph and box and whisker plots, we can see that the percent attendance of students who qualify for free and reduced meals is lower than the overall district attendance. The mean percentage attendance of students who qualify for free and reduced meals in 2019-2020 was slightly larger than 94% while the mean percentage attendance of all students is a little over 95%. In the 2020-2021 school year, the mean for students who qualified for free and reduced meals dropped by over 2% down to under 92% while the mean for all students only dropped by approximately 1% to around 94%. Both rates dropped another 1% in the 2021-2022 school year. In the 2021-2022 school year, the median attendance rate for students receiving free and reduced meals was around 91.5% while the median for all students was around 93.5%. This could be for a variety of reasons. Students who qualify for free and reduced meals tend to be from lower income households. These students often do not put as much of an emphasis on education as other households. Transporation is also sometimes a problem with adults in the household often working atypical hours. Many of these students are focused on making it through the day, not coming to school.
2.) Is there a correlation between the percentage of students with high needs in a district with the overall district attendance rate?
Students with high needs are classified as students who are English Learners, students with disabilities, and students who receive free or reduced meals. Approximately 50% of the students in the state of Connecticut qualify as "high needs" students". The scatter plots and regression lines show that there is a strong correlation between the percentage of high needs students and the percentage attendance rate. With a pearson r value of -0.71, we can see that the higher percentage of students with high needs, the lower attendance rate. The box and whisker plot shows us that the median for the attendance rate for students with high needs is about 2% lower than the rate for all students in Connecticut with the high needs rate sitting around 91.5%. The line graph shows a drastic difference in attendance rates between students with high needs and students without high needs with the students without high needs having a higher rate than those with. In the 2020-2021 school year, the two differed by approximately 4% which is more than double the discrepency the year before. the 2021-2022 school year saw the lowest attendance rates yet with the high needs group reporting an almost 90% attendance rate. This is a 6% drop from where it was in 2019-2020. Students with high needs are in families that have higher needs than the average family. These families tend to have other factors that get in the way of attending school.
3.) Is there a correlation between the percentage of students by race in a district with the overall district attendance rate?
In Connecticut, 48% of the student racial makeup is white. Hispanic/Latino students make up 29% of the student population while black and all other races make up the other 23%. White students overall tend to have a higher attendance rate than black of Hispanic students. When looking at the scatter plot, the correlation between percentage of black students is weak. The data is clustered mostly between 0% and 20% percent students who are black and outside of that the data is very spread out. Within that 20%, the results span a range of about 6% along the attendance rate. Conversely, while Hispanic students are also clusterd below 20%, the cluster only spans about 4% along the attendance rate. There is a strong positive correlation between the percentage of students who are white. The higher percentage of students who are white, the higher the attendance rate. The line graph shows that students who are white have had consistently higher attendance rates than all other races. During the 2020-2021 school year, the attendance rates of students who are black took a large drop. This could be due to covid-19 and how different schools and areas of the state approached learning during the pandemic.
4.) Is there a correlation between the percentage of students who are English Language Learners in a district with the overall district attendance rate?
Only 8% of the students in Connecticut are English Learners. We can see from the box and whisker plots, that the attendance rates of English Learners and all students are very close. The distribution of the data of the two groups is very similar. The interquartile ranges are almost the same but the range of English Learners is larger than the range of all students. The scatter plots and pearson r values show that there is a merderate correlation between attendance rate and percent English Learners. The data in general is clustered below 10% Englsih Learners. While English Learners have a lower attendance than all students, their attendance rates are still higher than the other high needs groups.
5.) Is there a correlation between the size of a district and the attendance rate?
When looking at the scatter plot, we can see most of the districts have less than 5000 students. The pearson r value is -0.22 which shows no real correlation between district size and attendance rate.
6.) Is there a trend in the change in attendance rates over the years?
From the 2019-2020 school year to the 2021-2022 school year, there has been a lot of change in the world. As we worked, lived through, and adapted to a new way of living, attendance rates at schools dropped. From the 2019-2020 school year to the 2020-2021 school year, the overall attendance rate dropped about 1.5%. The 2020-2021 school year was the first full school year of the pandemic where many students were either fully virtual or on a hybrid model. There were still many safety measures in place. From the 2020-2021 school year to the 2021-2022 school year, attendance rats dropped over 1.5%. The 2021-2022 school year was the first year back to "normal" after the pandemic. Safety guidelines were relaxed and people became sick with a variety of things more often.


Resources:
https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/adding-new-column-to-existing-dataframe-in-pandas/
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/16729574/how-can-i-get-a-value-from-a-cell-of-a-dataframe
https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2021/08/understanding-bar-plots-in-python-beginners-guide-to-data-visualization/
https://pythonbasics.org/matplotlib-bar-chart/
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/55942693/how-do-i-save-the-entire-graph-without-it-being-cut-off
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/22028064/matplotlib-boxplot-without-outliers
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/70937689/plotting-multiple-line-graphs-in-matplotlib
https://www.pauldesalvo.com/convert-y-axis-labels-to-a-percentage-in-python-matplotlib/
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/45239261/savefig-text-chopped-off
